---
title: AN ACT INSTITUTIONALIZING A NATIONAL VALUES, ETIQUETTE, AND MORAL UPRIGHTNESS PROGRAM
congress: 18
bill: 1
authors:
  ALAN PETER "COMPANERO" S. CAYETANO
---

# AN ACT INSTITUTIONALIZING A NATIONAL VALUES, ETIQUETTE, AND MORAL UPRIGHTNESS PROGRAM

## Explanatory Note

The Filipino People, imploring the aid of Almighty God mandated through the Philippine Constitution, that the state shall promote and protect the physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual and social well being of the youth and also recognizes its role in nation building. It shall inculcate in the youth values of patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their involvement in pubic and civic affairs. The aspiration is to build a just and humane society, and establish a Government that shall embody our ideals and aspirations, and promote the common good.

Filipinos are known to be God-fearing, loving and hospitable, family-oriented, and resilient among others. According to Gallup International, the Philippines is the 3rd happiest country in the world despite all the adversities and challenges faced in recent years. The core values identify us as a nation and as people. In light of the changing times and the height of Internet use where the Youth is exposed to all sort of information and disinformation, there is a pressing need to strengthen our common core values and inculcate universally acceptable moral standards.

Moreover, in the advent of social media and how it has evolved to be indispensable in our daily lives, it is important that Etiquette and Moral Uprightness is also introduced and taught for all of us to keep up with the modern era and act according to a customary set of behaviour.

As the Philippine develops and economy grows, it is essential that we do not forget who we are as a people. our divine purpose, and duties to our nation

In view of the foregoing approval of this bill is earnestly sought

## Bill

### SECTION 1. Title.

This Act shall be known as the "National Values, Etiquette, and Moral Uprightness Act".

### SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy.

The Constitution states that imploring the aid of Almighty God, in order to build a just and humane society, and establish a Government, it shall embody our ideals and aspirations, promote the common good, conserve and develop our patrimony, and secure to ourselves and our posterity, the blessings of independence and democracy under the rule of law and a regime of truth, justice, freedom, love, equality and peace.

Moreover, it is the policy of the State to promote and protect the physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, and social well being of the youth and also recognizes its role in nation building. It shall inculcate in the youth patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their involvement in public and civic affairs.

### SECTION 3. Definition of Terms.

For purposes of this Act, the following terms are defined:

(a) "National Values" - set of ideals and principles shared by the members of the community;

(b) "Etiquette" - customary code of behaviour to be observed in a society; and

(c) "Moral Uprightness" - conduct that conforms to an accepted standard of right and wrong,

### SECTION 4. Establishment of the Commission on Filipino Values.

The Secretary of the Department of Education (DepEd) as Chairperson, the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), a representative from both houses of Congress, together with representatives from major religious groups in the country shall conduct a nationwide consultation, and through consensus craft a Program on National Values, Etiquette and Moral Uprightness.

The Commission shall draft a roadmap for the implementation of the Program, which shall be submitted to the President for his approval. The Commission shall likewise implement the approved Program.

The Commission shall continue to meet every three (3) years, or as the need arises, and shall conduct an evaluation of the accomplishments and impact of this Act, as well as the performance, for purposes of updating as needed.

### SECTION 5. Institutionalizing of National Values, Etiquette, and Moral Uprightness in Educational Institutions.

To carry out the above-declared policy, teaching of the National program on Values including but not limited to patriotism, national pride and identity, Etiquette, and Moral Uprightness shall be institutionalized as part of the curriculum in all levels in Kindergarten, Elementary, Secondary, Technical-Vocational, and College institutions in the country.

### SECTION 6. Implementation in Workplaces.

It is hereby mandated that all private entities, through its Human Resources Department (HRD) or its equivalent, shall include modules of the same subject in its employee orientation or training programs. Seminars may also be held in this
regard depending on what the respective HRD deems appropriate.

Government offices, Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations, national agencies, and local government units, shall likewise observe the same practice across the board.

### SECTION 7. Separability Clause.

If any provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional inoperative, the other provisions not so declared shall remain in force and effect.

### SECTION 8. Repealing Clause.

All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations or parts, thereof inconsistent with the Act or the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

### SECTION 9. Effectivity Clause.

This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.
